🌐 REST API Reference
---------------------

``localtileserver`` exposes a comprehensive REST API built on
`FastAPI <https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/>`_. Interactive API documentation
is available at ``/swagger/`` when the server is running.


Core Tile Endpoints
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

These endpoints serve tiles and metadata for raster files specified via the
``filename`` query parameter. If no filename is provided, the server falls
back to the file configured at startup (via ``app.state.filename``) or the
built-in San Francisco Bay example data.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 35 10 55

   * - Endpoint
     - Method
     - Description
   * - ``/api/tiles/{z}/{x}/{y}.{fmt}``
     - GET
     - Serve a single map tile at the given zoom/x/y coordinates.
   * - ``/api/thumbnail.{fmt}``
     - GET
     - Serve a thumbnail preview of the entire raster.
   * - ``/api/metadata``
     - GET
     - Return raster metadata (CRS, bounds, band info, dtype, etc.).
   * - ``/api/bounds``
     - GET
     - Return geographic bounds in a specified CRS.
   * - ``/api/statistics``
     - GET
     - Return per-band statistics (min, max, mean, std, histogram).
   * - ``/api/validate``
     - GET
     - Validate whether the file is a Cloud Optimized GeoTIFF.
   * - ``/api/palettes``
     - GET
     - List all available color palettes.
   * - ``/api/part.{fmt}``
     - GET
     - Extract a bounding box crop from the raster.
   * - ``/api/feature.{fmt}``
     - POST
     - Extract data masked to a GeoJSON feature (POST body).


Common Query Parameters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Most tile and thumbnail endpoints accept these parameters:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20 80

   * - Parameter
     - Description
   * - ``filename``
     - Path or URL to the raster file.
   * - ``indexes``
     - Comma-separated band indexes (e.g., ``1,2,3``).
   * - ``colormap``
     - Colormap name (e.g., ``terrain``, ``viridis``), or a JSON color definition.
   * - ``vmin``
     - Minimum value for rescaling (comma-separated for per-band values).
   * - ``vmax``
     - Maximum value for rescaling (comma-separated for per-band values).
   * - ``nodata``
     - Override the file's nodata value.
   * - ``expression``
     - Band math expression (e.g., ``(b4-b1)/(b4+b1)``). Mutually exclusive
       with ``indexes``.
   * - ``stretch``
     - Stretch mode: ``none``, ``minmax``, ``linear``, ``equalize``, ``sqrt``,
       ``log``.


Output Formats
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``{fmt}`` path parameter controls the output format:

- ``png`` -- PNG (default)
- ``jpeg`` / ``jpg`` -- JPEG
- ``webp`` -- WebP
- ``tif`` / ``tiff`` / ``geotiff`` -- GeoTIFF
- ``npy`` -- NumPy array


STAC Endpoints
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Endpoints for visualizing STAC catalog items. All require a ``url`` parameter
pointing to a STAC Item JSON.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 40 10 50

   * - Endpoint
     - Method
     - Description
   * - ``/api/stac/info``
     - GET
     - Get STAC item metadata and available assets.
   * - ``/api/stac/statistics``
     - GET
     - Get per-asset/band statistics.
   * - ``/api/stac/tiles/{z}/{x}/{y}.{fmt}``
     - GET
     - Serve tiles from a STAC item's assets.
   * - ``/api/stac/thumbnail.{fmt}``
     - GET
     - Serve a thumbnail from a STAC item.

Additional parameters: ``url`` (required), ``assets`` (comma-separated),
``expression``, ``max_size``.


Xarray Endpoints
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Endpoints for serving tiles from in-memory xarray DataArrays. DataArrays must
be pre-registered in the server's ``xarray_registry``.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 40 10 50

   * - Endpoint
     - Method
     - Description
   * - ``/api/xarray/info``
     - GET
     - Get DataArray metadata.
   * - ``/api/xarray/statistics``
     - GET
     - Get per-band statistics.
   * - ``/api/xarray/tiles/{z}/{x}/{y}.{fmt}``
     - GET
     - Serve tiles from a DataArray.
   * - ``/api/xarray/thumbnail.{fmt}``
     - GET
     - Serve a thumbnail from a DataArray.

Additional parameters: ``key`` (registry key), ``indexes``, ``max_size``.


Mosaic Endpoints
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Endpoints for creating virtual mosaics from multiple raster files.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 40 10 50

   * - Endpoint
     - Method
     - Description
   * - ``/api/mosaic/tiles/{z}/{x}/{y}.{fmt}``
     - GET
     - Serve mosaic tiles from multiple raster files.
   * - ``/api/mosaic/thumbnail.{fmt}``
     - GET
     - Serve a mosaic thumbnail.

Additional parameters: ``files`` (comma-separated paths/URLs), ``indexes``,
``max_size``.


Interactive Documentation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When the server is running, visit ``/swagger/`` for the full interactive
OpenAPI documentation. This is auto-generated by FastAPI and allows you to
try out all endpoints directly in your browser.
